- Update year and update license test to 2020.
- Bump OSVVM to latest version.
- Add possibility to configure random stalls for AXI Stream. :vunit_issue:`557`
- JSON-for-VHDL: use base16 encodings. :vunit_issue:`595`
- First release requiring Python 3.6 or higher. Python 2.7, 3.4 and 3.5 are not supported anymore. :vunit_issue:`596` :vunit_issue:`601`
- Start adding type annotations to the Python sources; add mypy (a static type checker) to the list of linters. :vunit_issue:`601` :vunit_issue:`626`
- Move co-simulation (VHPIDIRECT) sources (implementation and example) to `VUnit/cosim <https://github.com/VUnit/cosim>`_. :vunit_issue:`606`
- ghdl interface: with ``ghdl_e``, save runtime args to JSON file. :vunit_issue:`606`
- Add missing mode assertions to ``-93`` sources of ``integer_vector_ptr`` and ``string_ptr``. :vunit_issue:`607`
- Add method ``get_simulator_name()`` to public Python API. :vunit_issue:`610`
- Start replacing ``join``, ``dirname``, etc. with ``pathlib``. :vunit_issue:`612` :vunit_issue:`626` :vunit_issue:`632`
- Fix parsing adjacent hyphens in a literal. :vunit_issue:`616`
- Fix ``ghdl.flags`` error in documentation. :vunit_issue:`620`
- Rename compile option ``ghdl.flags`` to ``ghdl.a_flags``. :vunit_issue:`624`
- Move ``project.Library`` to separate file.
- Remove Travis CI and AppVeyor, use GitHub Actions only.
- Remove Sphinx extension ABlog; handle posts as regular pages in subdir ``blog``.
- Update GHDL to v0.37 in Windows CI jobs.
- Fix regression in GHDL (``prefix of array attribute must be an object name``). :vunit_issue:`631` :vunit_issue:`635`
- Add code coverage support for GHDL. :vunit_issue:`627`
