
Breaking Changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- JSON-for-VHDL is no longer shipped with VUnit. Support is now provided through a separate VUnit package. Install it with:

  ``pip install vunit-json-for-vhdl``

  Calls to the ``add_json4vhdl()`` method must be replaced with ``add_package("vunit-json-for-vhdl")``. (:vunit_issue:`1171`)


Deprecations
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Dropped support for Python 3.8 and 3.9 which have reached their end of life, see https://devguide.python.org/versions. (:vunit_issue:`1163`)


Features
~~~~~~~~

- Added support for GHDL with LLVM-JIT backend. (:vunit_issue:`1105`)
- Added support for VHDL-2019 in Questa. Related issues #1135 and #1169. (:vunit_issue:`1135`)
- Added support for new Questa ``-ini`` option. (:vunit_issue:`1156`)
- Added initial support for external package addition. This is in preparation for supporting third-party additions to
  VUnit in a controlled way. Some packages currently shipped alongside VUnit will also be moved to this new system, for
  example the JSON-for-VHDL package. By separating the packages from the core of VUnit, we make it easier for users to
  create, maintain, and share their own packages independent of the VUnit core. Package management is based on the Python
  ecosystem, i.e they can be hosted on PyPi and installed by using pip. (:vunit_issue:`1166`)
- Improved support for non UTF-8 encoded outputs from simulators. (:vunit_issue:`1167`)
- Added seed as an optional input to ``pre_config`` hooks. The seed is identical to the base seed provided to the simulation. (:vunit_issue:`1176`)
- Enabled VHDL-2019 for GHDL >= 6.0.0.

  Note that VUnit log location support based on call_path is deactivated as this is yet to be supported by GHDL. (:vunit_issue:`1177`)
