:tags: VUnit
:author: lasplund
:excerpt: 1

VUnit Phases
============

What You Will Learn
-------------------

1. The different phases a VUnit testbench traverses during its execution.
2. How phases can be used by a process, such as a third part verification component (VC), to prevent a premature
   simulation exit without requiring non-intuitive coding constructs on the user side.
3. How testbench processes can be made aware of an imminent simulation exit, allowing them to carry out exit tasks such
   as verifying the correctness of the final DUT state or logging interesting summary information.

Introduction
------------

During the course of a simulation, VUnit guides the testbench through a number of distinct *phases*. These phases are
determined by the structure of the test runner process - the main process controlling the execution of the testbench.
Some phases are completely encapsulated within a VUnit procedure, such as ``test_runner_setup`` and
``test_runner_cleanup``, while others are defined as a code region within the test runner process. The code example
below outlines a test runner process consisting of two test cases. The phases involved are named and described by the
``phase`` procedure calls. This procedure, created specifically for this example, provides a visual representation of
the different phases and their transitions as a VUnit log.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/test_runner.html

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/phases.html

To infer as little overhead as possible (but not less than that), VUnit permits testbenches without named test cases,
resulting in the elimination of certain phases. However, ``test_runner_setup`` and ``test_runner_cleanup`` remain
present at all times.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/test_runner_minimal.html

Of these phases, the test runner cleanup phase is the most useful and the focal point of this blog. To understand how we
can use this phase, we can start by showing the usually hidden trace messages from the ``runner`` logger when the
``test_runner_cleanup`` function is invoked:

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/phases_minimal.html

As we can see VUnit keeps track of the phases internally and there is a concept of a *gate* when entering and exiting a
phase. In this example, VUnit passes through the gates but it's possible for a user to prevent that by locking a gate.
This capability can be used to prevent VUnit from cleaning up and exiting the simulation until all processes are done,
resolving the issues that arose with using an event as a barrier in our previous blog:

1. The phase lock solution scales well. ``test_runner_cleanup`` is already present in every VUnit testbench and it
   eliminates the need for creating a new event for every process to wait on.
2. There is no race condition as it doesn't matter in which order processes complete. ``test_runner_cleanup`` will
   wait until every process has removed its lock.
3. With the absence of any additional constructs in the test runner, there is no risk of forgetting to wait for another
   process, and any process can introduce locks without requiring external changes. This is especially important for
   verification components, as they can start using locks without the necessity of their users having to update
   their code.

Phase Gate Locks
----------------

To see the phase gate locks in action weâ€™re going to revisit the example provided in the :doc:`event blog
<2023_03_31_vunit_events>`. In that example our ``dut_checker`` process notified its completion with the
``dut_checker_done`` event.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_event.html

The test runner process waited for that event before calling ``test_runner_cleanup``.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/test_runner_with_event.html

Before adding the locks, we need to remove the ``dut_checker_done`` event, the notification of that event in the
``dut_checker``, and the wait statement waiting for that event in ``test_runner``. Afterwards, we can update the
``dut_checker`` according to the code listing provided below.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_lock.html

The first step is to acquire a unique key for the gate we want to control, in this case the entry gate for the
``test_runner_cleanup`` phase. This is done by calling the ``get_entry_key`` function with ``test_runner_cleanup`` as
the parameter. Each gate has many locks and the returned key fits one of those locks. An alternative design for locking
a gate would be to use a keyless system, wherein locks can be added and removed to/from gates. However, such a design is
prone to a class of bugs where a process unlocks a gate more than it locks it. This will lead to locks previously added
by other processes being removed and the protection against premature termination of the simulation is lost.

The second step is to determine when to lock the gate. Generally, this is done when the process has a task that requires
completion before the end of the simulation. In this case, this is when the queue is not empty. Locking is done by
passing the ``runner`` signal, the key, and optionally a logger, to the ``lock`` procedure. The ``runner`` signal in
VUnit contains several events, of which ``runner_phase`` is used to indicate that something occurred related to the
VUnit phases.

The third step is to decide when to unlock. Unlocking should be done when the process has completed a task, provided
there are no more tasks left to complete. In this case we unlock if the queue is empty. If we were to unlock before
checking the queue, and the test runner process has already pushed all remaining data sets to the queue, we allow
``test_runner_cleanup`` to end the simulation and data is lost. When unlocking eventually does take place,
``runner_phase`` is activated and triggers ``test_runner_cleanup`` to verify that all locks are unlocked such that it
can proceed.

Let's take a look at what the log looks like after implementing these updates.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_lock_log.html


First, we can observe that ``dut_checker`` is locking the gate three times in succession without unlocking it in
between. This is perfectly fine as it keeps a locked gate locked and allows for simpler code. The same goes for an
unlocked gate; if it is unlocked multiple times, it will remain unlocked. This is another advantage of having unique
keys, as a keyless design would not accommodate this behaviour.

We can also see how ``test_runner_cleanup`` halts on the entry gate and proceeds immediately after the locked gate lock
is unlocked.

An alternative design solution for the ``dut_checker`` is to move the last if statement to the top:

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_initial_unlock.html

The only difference is that there will be an initial unlock because of the initially empty queue but that is, as
mentioned before, allowed.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_initial_unlock_log.html

It may be tempting to combine the two initial if statements into one where we first call ``unlock`` and then wait for
the ``new_data_set`` event. However, this is a bad idea since it exposes us to a potential `Time-Of-Check To Time-Of-Use
bug <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-of-check_to_time-of-use>`_. When we call ``unlock``, it triggers
``runner_phase``, which is an operation consuming delta cycles. During this time, a new data set may have been pushed to
the queue and the ``new_data_set`` event is activated before we return from the ``unlock`` procedure. Consequently,
``dut_checker`` will miss the first event and block on the wait statement until the second event arrives some time after
the DUT responded to the first data set. However, the first data set is still at the front of the queue and it will
cause a failure when it is used to verify the DUT response to the second data set. This is a bug that only occurs under
unfortunate timing circumstances and in this example we've added a dummy procedure with a finely tuned delay to showcase
the scenario. Even if the risk of encountering this bug is low, or not even possible with the timing at hand, it would
be unwise to make any assumptions about the test runner timing as that can change in the future.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_combined_if.html

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/dut_checker_with_combined_if_log.html

With the two separate if statements, there is still a potential issue to consider. What if the test runner process
pushes the last data set to the queue, notifies the ``new_data_set`` event, and then immediately calls
``test_runner_cleanup``? If the ``dut_checker`` just missed that last data set and unlocks the gate, will it then have
enough time to detect the new data set after the unlocking and lock the gate again, before ``test_runner_cleanup``
terminates the simulation? Fortunately, there is time for that, as long as the presented design is used.

Keeping both of the if statements at the beginning serves no purpose other than explaining the dangers of misplaced code
optimizations. We recommend keeping the if statement that unlocks the gate at the bottom, thereby keeping the
optimization temptation "out of sight".

At this point, we have designed a testbench where the ``dut_checker`` is solely responsible for carrying out its
intended task and ensuring it is fully completed before the simulation ends (high cohesion). There are no
responsibilities for the ``test_runner`` process. We have also ensured that the ``dut_checker`` does not make any
assumptions about the timing of the ``test_runner`` (low coupling).


Phase Transition Events
-----------------------

In the previous chapters, we described how a process can prevent phase transitions by locking gates. However, there are
also use cases that require processes to simply be aware of such transitions without needing to prevent them. To
illustrate, let us take a look at the AXI Stream standard. This standard provides a set of `protocol assertions
<https://developer.arm.com/documentation/dui0534/b>`_ that can be employed to verify if a stream conforms to the
protocol. One such assertion, ``AXI4STREAM_ERRM_STREAM_ALL_DONE_EOS``, states that

*"At the end of simulation, all streams have had their corresponding TLAST transfer"*

An AXI Stream protocol checker will not prevent a simulation from exiting but it must be given the opportunity to check
that all streams have ended when that is about to happen. Let's see how this is solved in the ARM-provided protocol
checker IP:

*"The testbench that you are using has a signal called EOS_signal. You must drive EOS_signal HIGH at the end of the
simulation for at least one clock cycle."*

This is an example of a scenario in which a user must take a non-obvious step to ensure that a verification component
works correctly. This is due to the fact that the ARM IP lacks a testbench structure to rely upon. A VUnit verification
component, on the other hand, has a known structure in the mandatory presence of the ``test_runner_cleanup`` procedure.
This procedure will trigger the ``runner_phase`` event when the phase changes to ``test_runner_cleanup``, giving the AXI
Stream protocol checker the option to act. However, remember that ``runner_phase`` is activated on all phase changes and
also when there is activity related to phase gate locks. Therefore, before checking stream status, the protocol checker
must verify that the event was caused by an imminent simulation exit and not some other change. This is done by
confirming that the active phase is ``test_runner_cleanup`` and that the testbench is *within* the gates of that phase,
i.e. it has passed the entry gate but not yet the exit gate. The principle for the
``AXI4STREAM_ERRM_STREAM_ALL_DONE_EOS`` assertion is outlined below. After ensuring that the simulation is about to
terminate, the process is able to make its final check, provided it is done within a single delta cycle.

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/end_of_simulation_process.html

Incorporating this protocol checker into our example testbench generates the following log:

.. raw:: html
    :file: img/vunit_phases/end_of_simulation_process_log.html

As you can see from the pass message, the check is perform just before the simulation comes to an end.

Final Words
-----------

In this blog we've shown how phases can be used to handle the final ticks of your simulation in a robust and reliable
way while adhering to two key concepts of good code design: high cohesion and low coupling.

Do you have your own personal use cases for phases, or perhaps use cases that you think are not supported? Feel free to
reach out and share them with us!
